Kim G. Larsen: Quantiative modal logics for specification and 
verification

The 2007 Turing Award was recently given to Ed Clarke, Alan Emerson 
and Joseph Sifakis for their ground-breaking work on model checking, 
refing to the following problem: "Given a model of a system, test 
automatically whether this model meets a given specification. 
Typically, the systems one has in mind are hardware or software 
systems, and the specification contains safety requirements such as 
the absence of deadlocks and similar critical states that can cause 
the system to crash." Often specifications are expressed in temporal 
logics such as LTL or CTL allowing both safety (something bad will 
never happen) and liveness (something good will eventually happen) 
properties to be expressed.

Embedded systems are software systems executing on dedicated hardware 
with the purpose of monitoring and controlling a complex physical 
environment (e.g. the breaking system in a car). Here quantitative 
requirements are often mandatory, including constraints on timing 
behaviour, energy and memory consumption, bandwidth etc.  Also, these 
constraints may be either hard or soft depending on whether the 
constraint is unconditional or a small probabilities for the 
constraint to be violated is acceptable.  In the talk we shall 
illustrate different quantitative extensions of CTL to include time, 
energy as well as probabilities.  Also we shall show quantitative 
verification for these logics are supported by various branches of 
the UPPAAL verification tool (www.uppaal.com).
