Renate Schmidt: Simulation and Synthesis of Deduction Calculi

There are numerous different ways of formalising deductive
reasoning for a logic.  In this talk (i) we compare and contrast
several such approaches and (ii) we discuss ways of
systematically developing sound, complete and terminating
deduction calculi for modal logics. 

In particular, in the comparison we discuss how ground semantic
tableau and resolution calculi can be simulated in the framework
of first-order resolution.  This helps to shed new light on the
relationship between different deduction methods, but can also be
used to transfer soundness, completeness and decidability results
between different approaches.  The simulation results can be
exploited to transfer first-order automated reasoning techniques
to modal deduction systems and allow the use of first-order
provers as modal provers.  

Regarding the systematic development of calculi we present a
method for synthesising tableau calculi. The method takes a
high-level specification of the formal semantics of a logic as
input and transforms it into a set of tableau inference rules,
which can then be used to reason within the logic.  The method
guarantees that the generated rules form a calculus that is
sound and constructively complete. Combined with a new blocking
mechanism this defines a terminating tableau calculus whenever
the logic has the finite model property and admits finite
filtration.

